Comfort.
What does this word bring to mind for you?
At first glance it might seem a fluffy little concept.
A pleasant feeling of relaxation.
A state of ease.
Peace of mind.
Sounds nice enough —
but not exactly essential to life.
If we dig deeper, we find more potent senses
of the word.
Freedom from pain or constraint.
The easing or alleviation of grief or distress.
It’s in these definitions that the real
value of comfort emerges
the vital ability to take relief, even for
a moment, from misery.
Even with people we might despise
seeing a vulnerable human being in torment
can stir
our most powerful instincts for compassion.
We feel disarmed.
These instincts represent some of our most
humanising qualities
sometimes melting previous divisions,
dissolving hostilities
allowing us to connect with each other in
powerfully healing ways.
But these same compassionate instincts
can also have harmful consequences.
In our attempts to comfort some people
we sometimes end up
throwing others under the bus.
Like when we tell our atheist son
he should keep
going to church to make his mother happy.
When our daughter discloses her same-sex attraction
and we command her never to tell her father
to spare his feelings.
When targets decide to go no contact with
their abusers
and we urge them not to because it’s so cruel.
Sadly many individuals submit to these appeals.
For others who decline to erase themselves
there are plenty of voices ready
to try and pile on the emotional blackmail.
For people who’ve been trained to look after
everyone else’s welfare
sometimes to the total exclusion of their own
these kinds of emotional blackmail can feel
extremely difficult and slippery to deal with
inviting targets to feel guilty and heartless
if they don’t comply.
But none of these supposedly compassionate
appeals stand up.
And when we stand back for a minute and examine
any of them
their manipulative power evaporates.
Whether we’re a target, a perpetrator or
witness to emotional blackmail
we all have the capacity to reflect on our choices
and distance ourselves from this abuse.
Resisting emotional blackmail means becoming
more discerning in our responses to distress
and learning that some appeals for personal comfort
should not be indulged.
Counter-intuitively, this doesn’t mean becoming
less compassionate
but more compassionate.
And it means recognising the double-edged
nature of emotion
which can be a valuable friend,
and a terrible enemy.
Emotions play a vital role in navigating life.
Part of that role is providing crucial shortcuts
in the simple daily dilemmas we encounter.
Individuals who’ve lost emotional response
can become immobilised
in a nightmare of information processing
generating endless rational arguments for
different courses of action.
Just choosing a shirt to wear could leave
them overwhelmed.
Emotion short-circuits this rumination.
We choose what feels right.
Social psychologist Robert Zajonc
challenged popular assumptions of his time
that emotion only occurred
after rational information processing had
taken place.
He noted research on preferences, attitudes,
impression formation and decision-making
suggesting that emotional judgements were
often made
independently of rational considerations
made faster than rational considerations
and made with greater confidence.
Other researchers have supported these observations
including neuroscientist Antonio Damasio
who found that our emotional evaluations
of situations and their outcomes
play a central role in our decision-making.
Unfortunately, the same simplistic nature
of emotional processing
that stops us agonising over simple choices
often leaves us
open to manipulation from emotional appeals
which encourage us to make uninformed judgements
on matters that need more serious consideration.
We can end up buying things we don’t want;
doing unreasonable favours for people;
condemning the innocent;
getting preyed on by ideological groups in
the midst of our grief;
giving abusers that one last chance — again.
Simplistic emotional processing also leads us
to place quite staggering burdens on others.
When we tell our atheist son
to keep going to church for his mother’s sake
or command our daughter to hide
her same-sex attraction from her father
or urge targets not to go no contact with
their abusers
or try to silence accounts of religious abuse
we might genuinely believe we’re doing something kind
even performing a humanitarian service.
But it’s just keyhole compassion —
focusing on one party’s possible distress
and completely failing to process the experience
of the other party.
Let’s widen the aperture and look at what
we’re really asking.
Here we have individuals
who’ve often had to cope
with long-term manipulation, abuse and dogma
grappling with draining levels of shame, anxiety
and neurosis.
Many feel like imposters, unable to fully
receive love
from the people around them
disconnected from their lives by pretending to be
what others expect them to be just to survive.
And now, just as they’re beginning to move
towards freedom, integrity, truth
and the restoration of psychological health
we’re directing them to carry on sacrificing
all of that
just so other people can
keep some comforting illusions.
Callous as it might seem to casually consign people
to a lifetime of repression like this
it’s not always driven by conscious malicious intent.
Often it’s pure laziness.
As the ‘law of less work’ observes
given the option, we tend to choose
the courses of action
that require the least effort.
And not just physical effort.
In a 2010 study by Kool and colleagues
participants showed a significant bias towards
courses of action that demanded less thinking.
Many studies like this show that, where possible
humans often try to avoid effortful mental activity.
Keyhole compassion is a hopelessly simplistic
emotional response to potential conflict
trying to bypass the complexity
of having to think, discuss, negotiate and resolve
and instead just pretend nothing’s different.
In fact keyhole compassion often works against
both parties.
To see why, let’s look at comfort zones.
We could visualise our comfort zone as a circle
containing all the activities, feelings and ideas
we feel most at ease with.
Outside that, we have a ring we could label
‘growth’.
This is a less comfortable area we move into
when we’re stretched by new activities,
feelings and ideas.
Learning new skills.
Working through difficult
but manageable new problems.
By trading some comfort for development
our central comfort zone expands.
Outside this we have another ring we could
label ‘overload’.
Here, the level of challenge starts to become
unmanageable.
We become depleted
and begin to accumulate damage.
To develop ourselves and expand our comfort zone
we want to be spending significant time in
the growth ring.
We also want to limit the time we spend in overload.
At times of grief and distress
we might experience extended periods in overload.
And it’s important to recharge with healthy
sources of comfort.
When we try to make our daughter’s sexuality
a guilty secret kept from her father
we’re directing her to spend significant
time in overload
constantly topping up the shame, anxiety and fear
she yearns to recover from.
But we’re also preventing her father
from moving out of comfort into growth.
Millions of parents who are initially hostile
when they find out their offspring
don’t conform
to some hope or expectation
do come around eventually
and enjoy a closeness neither party
would’ve imagined.
A closeness based on truth
not an illusion of closeness based on pretence.
If those parents had been kept in ignorance
they’d never’ve got to experience that.
Instinctive emotional thinking is great for
quick fixes
not long-term solutions.
Trying to apply simplistic emotional shortcuts
to complex situations
can leave us locked in pain and ignorance.
Sometimes an entire group is destroyed in
the process.
Whenever Maeve or Renie fall out of lockstep
with the personal plans and preferences of
their mother Norma
she loses it.
Their offences might range from
not being free for some family event
to revealing they didn’t plan to have children
to cutting their hair short.
On good days, Norma might descend
into displays of wailing distress.
On bad days, she escalates into full-blown
screaming tantrums.
Each time, Norma’s codependent husband Colin
tries to comfort her.
For Colin, who spends most of his home life
silently blending into the furniture
these incidents are just about the only time
he springs into action.
Often, after Norma eventually calms down
Colin scolds his daughters for upsetting her.
Sometimes he tells them, ‘You’ve destroyed
your mother!’
If Colin had stepped out of simplistic emotional
reflex mode
and into effortful reflective thinking
things could’ve turned out very differently.
Recognising the long-term damage
his daughters faced without his intervention
he might’ve formulated strategies
to defend them against Norma’s abuse
found ways to support them when they stood
up for themselves.
He could’ve built strong relationships with
them
and cultivated a solidarity that elevated
the whole family.
Whether or not his marriage survived
he’d still have Maeve and Renie in his life.
Instead, relying on endless emotional quick fixes
he focused exclusively on comforting Norma.
He declined to defend his daughters
and crushed their attempts to self-champion
which just seemed to antagonise Norma.
He tried to train them to be invisible like
him
in the false hope of an easier life.
In fact things got much worse.
By offering zero pushback, Colin reinforced
Norma’s belief
that she could do anything without consequence.
Eventually Maeve and Renie will break all
contact with their parents
leaving Colin to console the monster he helped
to create.
Colin will be mystified by their departure
and will blame them for destroying the family.
Norma is a squeaky wheel.
The term comes from an old proverb
‘the squeaky wheel gets the oil’
or in the US, ‘the grease’.
The message is that people who make the most noise
often end up getting what they want.
The squeaky wheel could be a parent;
a child, who gets indulged by parents and siblings;
an employee in the workplace;
an ideological group.
In his attempts to comfort Norma
Colin was certainly trying to alleviate distress.
The pivotal question is: ‘Whose distress?’
On the surface, it would seem
to be about Norma’s.
In fact it’s all about Colin’s.
Which is the root of this entire mess.
The fact is Colin’s uncomfortable with difficult
feelings.
He’s never learned to deal with them —
to tolerate them, sit with them, reflect on
what they’re really about.
Because of this, his knee-jerk emotional reflex
is to shut them down.
This real-life case illustrates the difference
between compassion and enabling.
Compassion supports and nurtures healthy development.
It acknowledges the wider context of a situation
and recognises that comforting interventions
sometimes have negative consequences
like obstructing learning, and reducing motivation
to change.
By recognising when to step in and when not
to
compassion facilitates growth.
In contrast, enabling indulges and excuses
unhealthy behaviour.
It focuses on the superficial discomfort of
the moment
and ignores harmful potential knock-on effects.
As a result, enabling facilitates impoverishment.
By enabling Norma, Colin reinforced
her dependence, regression and fragility.
The use of emotional blackmail
also distinguishes compassion
from its corrupted imitator.
When targets of abuse go no contact with malignant
abusers
some enablers try to shame them
claiming it’s like going no contact with someone
because they have cancer —
punishing someone for being unwell.
This analogy is classic emotional blackmail.
It completely disregards the welfare of targets
and adds insult to abuse by painting them
as heartless caricatures.
Let’s bring the analogy into line with the
reality of the abusive situation.
Imagine that contact with the patient
sets off an extreme allergic response in the visitor.
Just a word or even a look
could send the visitor’s immune system
into overdrive
producing a range of volatile symptoms.
This is what abuse does.
As a legacy of the endless attacks targets
have endured
their psychological immune systems
become hyper-responsive around the abuser.
They’ve learned all the little phrases
and gestures that signify a coming storm.
In response to these stimuli
the targets’ defences explode into overreaction.
Unlearning these deeply conditioned responses
can be a tough lengthy process.
Ongoing contact with abusers
which constantly reactivates these responses
can sabotage and unravel the target’s recovery.
Going no contact doesn’t just offer a path
to health for targets but also for abusers.
For some abusers, experiencing the authentic
rejection that results
from their abusive behaviour motivates them
to seek help.
Protecting them from rejection removes that
motivation.
Compassion allows both parties to choose health.
If abusers refuse it,
their targets are no less free
to choose health for themselves.
In contrast, enabling blocks that choice for
both parties.
If we don’t want to turn ourselves
—or anyone else —
into human chairs for the indulgence of others
we need to put our brains to work.
We need to shift out of emotional quick-fix
thinking
and into effortful reflective thinking.
We need to become comfortable with some difficult
feelings.
In particular, we need
to recognise that difficult feelings
can often be a healthy and vital part of development
and that trying to shut them down
can sabotage that development.
Sometimes that sabotage can span generations.
Life is a struggle for every species on the planet.
We’re thrust into a survival situation
in which we face danger, uncertainty and lack
of control.
Humans use a huge range of coping mechanisms
to get through these challenges.
We use mood-altering substances and activities
as a deflection —
food, alcohol, drugs, sex,
immersion in fictitious worlds
from literature, cinema and television.
Fine in moderation.
Not so fine if they become addictions
or ways of avoiding impending crises.
Another coping mechanism is magical thinking:
proposing causal relationships
between events, processes and entities
for which there’s no demonstrable connection.
Lindeman and Aarnio described magical thinking
as ‘ontological confusions’
between the distinct processes of physics,
biology and psychology.
We might believe inanimate objects have intentions
or that our thoughts have the power to create
catastrophe.
Research bears out what we might’ve suspected.
Magical thinking peaks when we experience
danger, uncertainty and lack of control.
When anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski
studied the inhabitants of the Trobriand Islands
off the east coast of New Guinea
he found an interesting disparity in their
fishing practices.
When they fished in the lagoon, they could use
an easy reliable method of poisoning
that produced consistently large catches.
In contrast, fishing in the open sea was hazardous
and there were huge variations in the size
of their catches.
Malinowski noted that with lagoon fishing
where the fishers could rely
on knowledge and skill
there was no appeal to magic.
But with open-sea fishing
where there was danger and uncertainty
magical rituals were extensively practiced
to try and secure safety and results.
When we feel a lack of personal control
we sometimes compensate
by turning to external systems
that seem to symbolise greater control.
In a 2008 study, Kay and colleagues asked
participants
to rate the likelihood that some kind of god
or nonhuman entity existed
who controlled events in the universe.
Prior to this question
some participants had been directed to remember
times in their lives when they felt absolutely
no personal control.
Other participants were told to recall events
in which they did feel personal control.
Members from the no personal control group
were much more inclined to endorse
the existence of a controlling being.
This ties into a vast field of research
showing how we change our magical ideas
to meet the psychological needs of the moment.
In times of overwhelming overload
magical thinking provides a comforting refuge
for some people.
In many cases, the mood-altering effect
of focusing on a magical idea
can help some individuals continue to function
in the most intense part of a crisis
before coming back down to earth
and gathering the strength to face reality
at a manageable pace.
The trouble ariseswhen
our use of magical thinking
opens a door to harm — to others or ourselves.
Like drink and drugs, everything depends on
the variety you’re using and the quantity
you’re taking.
Wearing what you believe to be lucky underwear
during an exam might well help you pass.
Not because the underwear has magical properties
but because your belief lowers your anxiety
boosts your confidence and enhances your performance.
But that belief becomes harmful if relying
on your underwear
leads you to neglect your studies.
And the problems multiply when you start
trying to involve other people.
I grew up with someone who attributed
a seemingly endless list
of objects with magical significance.
We were all expected to acquire detailed knowledge
of her boundless magical thinking
and cater to it.
If we didn’t, there were fireworks.
One day in my early teens making hot drinks
in the kitchen
I was startled by a blood-curdling scream
behind me.
She’d noticed a couple of crossed knives
on the kitchen counter
which magically signified an argument.
Ironically her nerve-shredding outbursts
often provoked the very outcome
she magically anticipated.
Sometimes things get more physical.
Many years ago, when my brother opened his
umbrella to dry indoors
a guest caused a huge scene trying to wrestle
it from him and close it
based on a magical notion that opening it
would bring bad luck.
I’m pleased to report that this tough twerp
was swiftly subdued by my brother.
But this is where the trouble starts:
when the magical thinker’s comfort impinges
on the comfort of others.
It’s here that we come to a crossroads with paths
that can lead to antagonism or veer away from it.
Many magical thinkers do veer away from it.
Some choose to listen to people’s valid
objections
and rethink their ideas.
Others choose to maintain their magical coping
mechanisms
but keep them confined to their own lives
without imposing on others.
Both of these roads offer the possibility
of peaceful coexistence
in which no one’s comfort eclipses another’s.
But they also require some effortful reflection.
And unfortunately, our lazy brains often accelerate us
straight ahead into conflict.
As Robert Zajonc noted, emotional judgements
are often made
with great confidence without rational processing.
He also noted that once those judgements are made
we often defend them with rationalisations.
This might feel like rational processing
but its goal is very different.
Rational processing looks for answers.
Rationalising looks for justifications.
It’s another kind of keyhole thinking.
We hunt for plausible-sounding arguments
in favour of our emotional judgements
and stop when we find them
blocking out valid arguments against.
When we try to force
our magical coping mechanisms on others
it would be great if the pushback we receive
prompted some reflection on our part.
Instead, we often just build walls
of fallacious rationalisations to justify
our imposition.
In our efforts to fend off critics
we misattribute them with imaginary malicious
motives
allowing us to personally attack them without
compunction.
We might even claim their objections are a sign
that they’re under the thrall of magical beings
invalidating their autonomy.
Convinced of the truth of our magical coping
mechanism
we rationalise that it’s ok to gag our critics
by making the questioning of our magical thinking
a social taboo.
We rationalise the abuse of child indoctrination
forcing powerless unsuspecting children
to accept our illusions as indisputable truth.
This abuse is passed down the generations.
We rationalise that we’re justified in punishing
disbelief
with a range of penalties up to and including
state-sanctioned murder.
So children who never got
the choice not to join
never get the choice to leave.
Each generation shackles the minds of the
next
in inescapable service
to the magical coping mechanism
of a long-dead ancestor.
Not content with earthly punishments
we invent magical dangers.
We torment our imaginations
with new punishments of incomprehensible scale.
Realms of perpetual torture
where bodies are boiled,
burned and stripped of flesh
then restored only to experience the same
all over againforever.
We rationalise this psychopathic sadism by
calling it justice.
By inventing these realms we create unrivalled
nightmares
demanding unprecedented levels of comfort.
Let’s reflect on the bizarre corner we’ve
just painted ourselves into.
We now have to comfort ourselves
against a magical danger that we dreamt up
to comfort ourselves against real danger.
Even if the real danger subsides
we’re now stuck in a self-reinforcing danger-comfort
cycle of our own making.
Even superficially positive elements
of a magical coping mechanism can create conflict.
The promise of a members-only magical afterlife
paradise
motivates us to impose ourselves on others
—especially loved ones —
in the belief we’re saving them.
When our loved ones don’t comply
we might blame them for our distress.
If we stepped back from our rationalisations
we might realise we’re the one causing the distress.
We’re operating a one-way system
expecting to be heard but declining to listen;
expecting our needs to be met
but not giving a thought to anyone else’s.
These one-way systems tend to end one way:
in pain and ignorance.
Our freedom to cope in our own way
with life’s ordeals ends
when our coping mechanisms become an added ordeal
for other people to cope with.
At that point
it’s no longer just a source of comfort
for the individual
but a source of oppression for the people
around them.
Then it’s time for pushback.
So long as any group continues to rationalise
behaviour
that obstructs and violates the liberties
and entitlements of others
conflict remains inevitable.
And no lazy emotional shortcuts
will magic it away.
Ex-theists who speak out
against religious abuse
have often gone through sustained periods
of debilitating overload
to finally break free of their indoctrination.
In abusive religious groups the gap between
comfort and overload is wafer thin.
Step outside the confines
of the predesignated comfort area
and you’re the enemy.
It can be a gruelling process
pushing through the wall of rationalisations
they were often born behind
and building a space in between these extremes
where growth feels manageable.
And even after this
ex-theists from some of the more extreme groups
face continuing overload
when they share their stories
working to make an easier departure for others
who are still trapped inside.
For their efforts, they’re relentlessly
hounded, marginalised and censored.
In some countries, killed.
The contrast between
this genuine risk-taking compassion
and the artificial product used in emotional
blackmail couldn’t be clearer.
Humans have found many ways of coping with
life’s challenges.
A final one worth mentioning is of course
rational effortful thinking.
With this strategy we can directly address
many of the ordeals in life that we fend off
with mood-altering substances
and magical thinking.
We can reduce uncertainty
through disciplined investigation.
We can overcome complex dangers
by methodically analysing their nature
and creating effective countermeasures.
Mindful reflection can also help us
come to terms with areas we can’t control;
to work through false hope
and refocus our attention
onto more productive areas.
Effortful thinking helps to us change the
things we can change
and to accept the things we can’t.
Think what could happen if we used it just
a little more often.
Humans often rely on snap instinctive simplistic
emotional judgements.
That’s fine if you’re choosing a shirt.
Not if you’re processing complex situations
with significant consequences.
Emotional blackmail urges us to take mental
shortcuts that work against us.
Notice when you’re being directed to look
with emotional eyes
at just one part of the picture.
Get into the habit of widening the aperture.
Don’t be rushed.
Take your sweet time.
Getting comfortable with difficult feelings
helps us move away
from enabling unhealthy behaviour
and towards compassion that encourages
health and growth.
If some people choose sickness and stagnation
we have no obligation to join them.
Compassion involves thinking about others
as well as ourselves —not instead of.
Rationalisations might have the feel of rational
processing
but their single-minded focus is justification,
not investigation.
Some emotional blackmailers are amenable to
rational reflection.
Others in the grip of powerful rationalisations
might be beyond reasonable reach.
Every attempt to restore clarity just gets
clouded over.
It’s important not to get sidetracked into
endless unproductive exchanges.
Thankfully, it only takes one rational party
to end emotional blackmail.
I’d like to end with some hypotheticals.
How would you respond to the following situations?
A religious leader justifies child indoctrination
on the grounds that his group is entitled
to ensure the survival of its beliefs.
A mother tells her offspring
they have to make
allowances for their father —
he hasn’t got their emotional control.
If you can identify the problems with these
you’re alreadyresisting emotional blackmail.